Haskell time tutorial (#152)
stackbuilders/tutorials: tutorials/haskell/haskell-time-tutorial/tutorial.md

---
title: Time, patterns and a little more
published: 2021-11-25
tags: haskell, pattern-synonyms, property-testing

> libraries: gtk3-0.14.4 glib-0.13.2.2

Reviewer: Is this required for this tutorial?

Author: No sorry, just copied pasted from other tutorial and forgot to delete them.

language: haskell
author: Felix Miño
author-name: Felix Miño
github-profile: felixminom

> description: In this tutorial we’re going to explore the use of pattern synonyms in Haskell, later we’ll give a brief view to the Stack Builders’ contribution to the `time` Haskell library and finally we’ll review how to use the utilities that were introduced in the contribution.

Reviewer: s/view/overview?

---

> As Stack Builder one of the core values of our company is contributing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Stack Builders one of the core values of our company is contributing
```

to open source (OSS). We believe that we have the power to change
people’s lives (or at least make it easier) by pushing the boundaries
of the software industry and we’re happy to announce that the past month
we were able to contribute to one of Haskell's core libraries, time.

One of our tech leads, Sebastian Estrella, started with the idea:

> “What if we bring some utilities that Ruby on Rails (RoR) has to Haskell?”.

Reviewer: Is this specific to Ruby on Rails or does Ruby also has the time utilities? I'm getting results for Ruby on Rails, but can you confirm if that's the case? Just curious.

Author: Yes as I far as I know this was only available in Ruby on Rails, @sestrella  could you help us clarifying this?

Reviewer 2: @felixminom yes, this is a feature only available in the context of Rails since by default Ruby does not provide these methods:

Rails (REPL)

```
➜  bundle exec rails c
Running via Spring preloader in process 77374
Loading development environment (Rails 6.1.4.1)
irb(main):001:0> Date.today.all_month
=> Mon, 01 Nov 2021..Tue, 30 Nov 2021
```

Ruby (REPL)

```
➜  irb
irb(main):001:0> require "date"
=> true
irb(main):002:0> Date.today.all_month
Traceback (most recent call last):
        4: from /nix/store/7nja5rmprz8sb72zvjbc1v85rswwsi4j-ruby-2.7.4/bin/irb:23:in `<main>'
        3: from /nix/store/7nja5rmprz8sb72zvjbc1v85rswwsi4j-ruby-2.7.4/bin/irb:23:in `load'
        2: from /nix/store/7nja5rmprz8sb72zvjbc1v85rswwsi4j-ruby-2.7.4/lib/ruby/gems/2.7.0/gems/irb-1.2.6/exe/irb:11:in `<top (required)>'
        1: from (irb):2
NoMethodError (undefined method `all_month' for #<Date: 2021-11-26 ((2459545j,0s,0n),+0s,2299161j)>)
irb(main):003:0>
```

Rails [monkey patch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monkey_patch) some types in the std library

For instance, “How can I get the range of days that a quarter has?”
or “How can I get a month’s boundaries?” were some of the questions
that came to our mind. In the following example I will show the Haskell
code needed to get a month's boundaries and its version in RoR.

```haskell
type MonthFirstDay = Day
type MonthLastDay  = Day

monthBoundaries :: Day -> (MonthFirstDay, MonthLastDay)
monthBoundaries day = let (y, m , _) = toGregorian day
   in (fromGregorian y m 1, fromGregorian y m 31)
```

```ruby
irb(main):003:0> Date.today.all_week

> => Mon, 13 Sep 2021..Sun, 19 Sep 2021

Reviewer: Note that the introduction for this example (and the Haskell code) is for months, but the Ruby on Rails example is for weeks. Also, I don't think this is comparing the same thing: the Haskell one is the implementation of the function, but the Ruby on Rails one is the call to that function.

To make it clearer, I guess the Haskell one could include how it looks using GHCi:

```
> monthBoundaries (read "2021-12-05")
(2021-12-01,2021-12-31)
```

(I'm not sure if that's exactly how it would look like.)

Author: Good catch I will somehow highlight the implementation with the new approach

```

> elmsetting the last day to always be 31st if some months have

Reviewer: Elm? 😛 

```suggestion
Setting the last day to always be 31st if some months have
```

Author: 🤣 Idk what happened there, there's a whole sentence missing.

less than 31 days? Could be crossing your mind right now. Well that’s

> because `fromGregorian` clip the values to be correct for each month,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because `fromGregorian` clips the values to be correct for each month,
```

but what is `fromGregorian`? Well that’s exactly what we wanted to

> avoid when using the time library.

Reviewer: What do we want to avoid? Using `fromGregorian`? Because of the name of the function?

Author: Yeah basically, I had a pretty nasty code that will exemplify better why the helper functions were needed, but we agreed with @sestrella that some users could complaint about this so we decided to use that is much more clearer but not as readable as the RoR approach.

> We wanted something more clear and readable as uncle bob mentioned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We wanted something more clear and readable as Uncle Bob mentioned:
```

"Indeed, the ratio of time spent reading versus writing is well over
10 to 1. We are constantly reading old code as part of the effort
to write new code. ...Therefore, making it easy to read makes it easier
to write.” So this was our motivation, to make something similar to the
utilities that RoR has and to ease Haskell developer’s lives.

> We started by opening an [issue][issue] on Github. Quick parentheses here,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We started by opening an [issue][issue] on GitHub. Quick parenthesis here,
```

when you want to work on OSS I’d recommend to start opening an issue
in the repo and discuss/brainstorm your idea with the maintainers,
sometimes there are some good reasons why the feature you’re proposing
have not been yet implemented and if you open a PR directly it could
rejected, so save yourself a disappointment and open an issue first.
Back to our issue, the maintainer of the library surprisingly proposed
to implement these helper functions using pattern synonyms and I said
surprisingly because I haven’t heard about them, so that’s why I’ll
like to introduce you some basics about this Haskell feature that,
actually, it has been around for some years now.

## A little about pattern synonyms

First of all I’d like to start with a caveat, this guide is not meant
to explain pattern synonyms in depth, instead it’s meant to be a practical
introduction to this concept.

> GHC documentation describe pattern synonyms like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GHC documentation describes pattern synonyms like:
```

Can you add a link to the documentation?

> “Pattern synonyms enable giving names to parametrized pattern schemes.
> They can also be thought of as abstract constructors that don’t have a
> bearing on data representation.”

And probably we’re in the same place as in the beginning so I’ve preferred
to introduce pattern synonyms with a real world example. We’re going to
borrow a pattern that exists in the time library. The [MonthOfYear][month-pattern]
pattern allows us to define months of the year not by a number but by its name.

The `MonthOfYear` data type is defined like this:

```haskell
type MonthOfYear = Int
```

As you can see, it is only an alias for `Int`. We now are able to define
months like `Int`s where January will correspond to 1 and so on. But

> Fortunately, since GHC 7.8 we are able to use pattern synonyms and we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fortunately, since GHC 7.8 we are able to use pattern synonyms and we
```

could, instead of using raw `Int`s, write this down in a pattern style
and have a more idiomatic way of defining months.

```haskell
pattern January :: MonthOfYear
pattern January = 1

pattern February :: MonthOfYear
pattern February = 2

pattern March :: MonthOfYear
pattern March = 3
.
.
.

-- | The twelve 'MonthOfYear' patterns form a @COMPLETE@ set.

> pattern December :: MonthOf
> 
> {-# COMPLETE January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December #-}Year
> pattern December = 12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern December :: MonthOf
pattern December = 12

{-# COMPLETE January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December #-}Year
```

```

If you’re curious about why the `{-# COMPLETE #-}` pragma is being

> used here’s a [link][complete-pragma] to a complete explanation.

Reviewer: I think the link text here should be something more descriptive. Perhaps something like this:

```suggestion
used, see the [COMPLETE pragma documentation][complete-pragma] for more information.
```

Or something like that.

Now if we need to pass a `MonthOfYear` as a parameter to a function
we could write something like:

```haskell

> foo November or foo 11 --Both will be equivalent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
foo November -- or foo 11 --Both will be equivalent
```

```

We’ll use this pattern in a function that basically takes a month and
a day and yields if the corresponding Date is a holiday.

```haskell
dateToHoliday :: MonthOfYear -> DayOfMonth -> String
dateToHoliday January  _   = "Happy new year!"
dateToHoliday November 1   = "Let's eat colada morada"

> dateToHoliday December 25  = "Merry Christmas jojojo"

Reviewer: I guess Santa would go “ho ho ho” instead of “jo jo jo” here. 🎅

Author: 🤣 that's the Colombian Santa

dateToHoliday _ _          = "Probably just a regular day"
```

Now you're probably wondering what is “colada morada”? Haha no worries,

> it’s an ecuatorian tradition in Ecuador and we eat this meal that is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it’s an Ecuadorian tradition and we eat this meal that is
```

If you want to keep this, perhaps it could be inside parentheses since it's not relevant for the tutorial. Also, you could link to Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colada_morada

Also, send some. 😝

``` bash
ghci> dateToHoliday January 12
"Happy new year!"
ghci> dateToHoliday November 1
"Let's eat colada morada"
```

So now we can use `11`, `November` in the `MonthOfYear` context
interchangeably across our code.

## Stack Builders contribution to Haskell’s time library

Well all of this preamble brings us to the contribution itself.
Pattern synonyms is what we used when working on `time`’s new features.
You can see the complete [pull request][PR-1](PR). I have to clarify
something, the PR has some different code than the one we’re going to
check here, since the maintainer decided to do some renaming and changed
the original PR’s code, you can check the changes [here][maintainer-PR].
Also, she added something extra to the boundaries that we had in mind at
first and now we can get the days that belong to a period and the period length.

First of all we started defining the new type class `DayPeriod`:

```haskell
class Ord p => DayPeriod p where
   -- | Returns the first 'Day' in a period of days.
   periodFirstDay :: p -> Day
   -- | Returns the last 'Day' in a period of days.
   periodLastDay :: p -> Day
   -- | Get the period this day is in.
   dayPeriod :: Day -> p
```

> 

Reviewer: Before the next paragraph, can you add a short explanation about what the type class includes? Is there any law that instances should satisfy?

Author: Nice I will add that info.

Author: Just one question, by laws you mean class constraints ? the `Ord` one to be more concrete?

Reviewer: No, I mean are there properties that instances of `DayPeriod` should satisfy? Here are some examples:

* `for all p. periodFirstDay p <= periodLastDay p`
* `for all p. dayPeriod (periodFirstDay p) == p`
* `for all p. dayPeriod (periodLastDay p) == p`
* `for all d. periodFirstDay (dayPeriod d) <= d`
* `for all d. periodLastDay (dayPeriod d) >= d`

I don't know which ones are required in order to make it a valid instance.

Reviewer 2: @jpvillaisaza good idea, I think this is an excellent opportunity to showcase some of the property tests introduced in the [second PR](https://github.com/haskell/time/pull/182)

Reviewer: I didn't mean all of the laws should be added, I'm not sure which ones are required to have a valid instance.

(This is about the things added below, but I'm adding the comment as part of this thread.)

tests. As I mentioned previously the maintainer added a couple of extra
functions, these are: `dayPeriod`, `periodAllDays` and `periodLength` but
they were not tested. We decided to implement the tests by using patterns
synonyms (yes, once again) and [property testing][property-testing], so
in this section we will review this code. Here is the [PR][PR-2]
that we proposed:

In this context, patterns were pretty useful too. We added a lot of value
almost free. Let me show a piece of code:

```haskell
newtype WDay = MkWDay Day
    deriving (Eq, Show)

instance Arbitrary WDay where
    arbitrary = do
        (MkWYear y) <- arbitrary
        (MkWMonthOfYear m) <- arbitrary
        (MkWDayOfMonth d) <- arbitrary
        pure $ MkWDay $ YearMonthDay y m d
```

This first part is not related to patterns, instead we're declaring the
`Arbitray` instance of `WDay` that is a `Day` wrapper so we can generate
random days in order to make our tests and therefore our code base more robust.
When using property testing we can stop thinking of generating the data,
and we can focus on testing that our code is behaving the way it's supposed

> too. We declared wrappers and their `Arbitrary` instaces for: `Day`, `DayOfMonth`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to. We declared wrappers and their `Arbitrary` instaces for: `Day`, `DayOfMonth`,
```

`Month`, `MonthOfYear`, `Quarter`, `QuarterOfYear` and `Year`. Probably
a better example is the `MonthOfYear` (sounds familiar? Yes, it's the pattern
that we took as an example in the previous section) wrapper and instance, so we
all are clear of what is going on here.

```haskell
newtype WMonthOfYear = MkWMonthOfYear MonthOfYear
    deriving (Eq, Show)
instance Arbitrary WMonthOfYear where
    arbitrary = fmap MkWMonthOfYear $ choose (-5, 17)
```

> Why it has the `-5` and `17` boundaries, well this function should be in the
> habilty to clip those values to the correct one, so we're testing this too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why does it have `-5` and `17` as boundaries? Well, this function should be
able to clip those values to the correct ones, so we're testing this too.
```

> I think we can forward, so now we're gonna explore the use of patterns in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I think we can move forward, so now we're gonna explore the use of patterns in the
```

context of test.

```haskell
testMonth :: [TestTree]

> 	testMonth =

Reviewer: ```suggestion
testMonth =
```

        dayPeriod (YearMonthDay y m d) == my
    , testProperty "periodAllDays" $ \(MkWMonth my@(YearMonth y1 m1)) ->
        all (== (y1, m1)) $ map (\(YearMonthDay y2 m2 _) -> (y2, m2)) $ periodAllDays my
    , testGroup
        "periodLength"
        [ testProperty "property tests" $ \(MkWMonth my) ->
            periodLength my >= 28
        , testCase "leap year" $
            periodLength (YearMonth 2024 February) @?= 29
        , testCase "regular year" $
            periodLength (YearMonth 2023 February) @?= 28
        ]
    ]
```

So in the first line we're saying that this test is of the type `testProperty`
(or property test) and that we're testing the `periodFirstDay` function, then we
create a `MkWMonth` that is the arbitrary version of `Month` and is the one that
will generate the randomness for us and finally we compare that the first day of
a month is the same when we use the `periodFirstDay` function than when using the
`YearMonthDay` pattern.

The `periodLastDay` tests are a little peculiar, we didn't use property testing
in this case since we wanted to test some particular cases. We tested that February's

> last day in a leap and in a regular is calculated properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
last day is calculated correctly for both leap and regular years.
```

> Well I think the two previous examples are very straight forward, but let me explain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well I think the two previous examples are very straightforward, but let me explain
```

the `periodAllDays` tests. When you're implementing property tests is a little
harder to think of what to test, you have to search a common property (that's why
they are called property test) that let you describe the expected behavior. So what
we're checking in this test is that `all` elements (`Days`) that the `periodAllDays`
function produces, when the `DayPeriod` is a `Month`, belong to the same year and month.
It makes sense right?. Also we can see the best of patterns in action, we're using them
to generate a random month: `MkWMonth my@(YearMonth y1 m1)`, and we're using them to
deconstruct a `Day` into `Year`, `MonthOfYear` and `DayOfMonth`:
`(YearMonthDay y2 m2 _) -> (y2, m2)`.

## Summary

It was a journey, but hopefully we got something from this tutorial. If I have to
highlight something is the following:

- When working on OSS always start by opening an issue and brainstorm your ideas with
the library's mainterners.
- Pattern synonyms is a Haskell feature that will make our code base more reable, and

> as shown in this tutorial could be useful in many scenarios.

Reviewer: Maybe mention again one of the patterns used to provide more details here.

Same for the next one, perhaps mention the name of one of the cool helper functions.

- Time library now has some cool helper functions that are pretty simple to use and
hopefully pretty useful too.

## Caveat

As you can see we didn't talk about weeks in this tutorial. That's becasue weeks are
not canonical, some years have 52 weeks and others have 53 and depending on what part
of the world you're in, the week could start in different days (Saturday, Sunday,

> Monday). We're dicusing this with the maintainer right now but haven't get an answer yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Monday). We're discussing this with the maintainer right now but haven't gotten an answer yet.
```

---
title: Time, patterns and a little more
published: 2021-11-25
tags: haskell, pattern-synonyms, property-testing
libraries: time
language: haskell
author: Felix Miño
author-name: Felix Miño
github-profile: felixminom
description: In this tutorial we’re going to explore the use of pattern synonyms in Haskell, later we’ll give a brief overview to the Stack Builders’ contribution to the `time` Haskell library and finally we’ll review how to use the utilities that were introduced in the contribution.
---

As Stack Builders one of the core values of our company is contributing
to open source (OSS). We believe that we have the power to change
people’s lives (or at least make it easier) by pushing the boundaries
of the software industry and we’re happy to announce that the past month

> we were able to contribute to one of Haskell's core libraries, time.

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the `time` library in Hackage?

> One of our tech leads, Sebastian Estrella, started with the idea:

Reviewer 2: @felixminom I'm more than OK about not mentioning my name here since it was a team effort

“What if we bring some utilities that Ruby on Rails (RoR) has to Haskell?”.
For instance, “How can I get the range of days that a quarter has?”
or “How can I get a month’s boundaries?” were some of the questions
that came to our mind. In the following example I will show the Haskell
code needed to get a month's boundaries and its version in RoR.

```haskell

> type MonthFirstDay = Day

Reviewer 2: @felixminom since this is a short code snippet I think it is clear that the first element of the tuple corresponds to the first day and the second one to the last day, in that sense, maybe we could get rid of `MonthFirstDay` and `MonthLastDay` type aliases? @jpvillaisaza what do you think?

Reviewer: Yes, `monthBoundaries :: Day -> (Day, Day)` sounds better for the tutorial.

Author: As I mentioned before I'm going to make both functions to exactly match, so now it will be something like this: `allMonth :: Day -> [Day]`

type MonthLastDay  = Day

monthBoundaries :: Day -> (MonthFirstDay, MonthLastDay)

> monthBoundaries day = let (y, m , _) = toGregorian day

Reviewer 2: Maybe it is just me, but moving the `let` statement to the next line makes the code more readable?

```hs
monthBoundaries :: Day -> (Day, Day)
monthBoundaries day = 
  let (y, m , _) = toGregorian day
  in (fromGregorian y m 1, fromGregorian y m 31)
```

   in (fromGregorian y m 1, fromGregorian y m 31)
```

```ruby
today = Date.today
today.next_month.all_month

> => Wed, 01 Dec 2021..Fri, 31 Dec 2021

Reviewer: I think this is still missing something to make the Haskell and Ruby codes comparable. The Haskell one shows the implementation (source), but the Ruby one shows how to use the implementation.

Assuming you have the Haskell implementation (which is the one in the example), then the Haskell equivalent would be something like this:

```
> today <- utctDay <$> getCurrentTime
> monthBoundaries today
(2021-11-01,2021-11-30)
```

Which is not that different compared to the Ruby one (ignoring that I skipped over the next month part, but the important thing is that the things being compared should match).

I think that the issue that you're trying to highlight is that with Haskell you have to implement the code because it's not part of the `time` library.

Author: This makes a lot of sense in that case I will rename the function. The RoR version actually returns a range so I will name the Haskell function `monthAllDays` and I will make it return a whole month (I was returning just starting and ending days). Also latter on, we can compare this with the `periodAllDays` that was implemented in the library, wdyt ?

>to write new code. ...Therefore, making it easy to read makes it easier
>to write.”

So this was our motivation, to make something similar to the
utilities that RoR has and to ease Haskell developer’s lives.

We started by opening an [issue][issue] on GitHub. Quick parenthesis here,
when you want to work on OSS I’d recommend to start opening an issue
in the repo and discuss/brainstorm your idea with the maintainers,
sometimes there are some good reasons why the feature you’re proposing
have not been yet implemented and if you open a PR directly it could
rejected, so save yourself a disappointment and open an issue first.
Back to our issue, the maintainer of the library surprisingly proposed
to implement these helper functions using pattern synonyms and I said
surprisingly because I haven’t heard about them, so that’s why I’ll
like to introduce you some basics about this Haskell feature that,
actually, it has been around for some years now.

## A little about pattern synonyms

First of all I’d like to start with a caveat, this guide is not meant
to explain pattern synonyms in depth, instead it’s meant to be a practical
introduction to this concept.

> GHC documentation describes pattern synonyms like:

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the documentation?

pattern allows us to define months of the year not by a number but by its name.

The `MonthOfYear` data type is defined like this:

```haskell
type MonthOfYear = Int
```

As you can see, it is only an alias for `Int`. We now are able to define
months like `Int`s where January will correspond to 1 and so on. But
fortunately, since GHC 7.8 we are able to use pattern synonyms and we
could, instead of using raw `Int`s, write this down in a pattern style
and have a more idiomatic way of defining months.

```haskell
pattern January :: MonthOfYear
pattern January = 1

pattern February :: MonthOfYear
pattern February = 2

pattern March :: MonthOfYear
pattern March = 3
.
.
.

-- | The twelve 'MonthOfYear' patterns form a @COMPLETE@ set.
pattern December :: MonthOf
pattern December = 12

{-# COMPLETE January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December #-}Year
```

If you’re curious about why the `{-# COMPLETE #-}` pragma is being
used, see the [COMPLETE pragma documentation][complete-pragma] for more
information.

Now if we need to pass a `MonthOfYear` as a parameter to a function
we could write something like:

```haskell

> foo November -- or foo 11 --Both will be equivalent

Reviewer 2: I'm not quite sure about the intention of `foo` in this context, however, if you are trying to highlight the fact that `November` and `11` are equivalent, I think could do something like this perhaps:

```hs
> November == 11
True
```

```

We’ll use this pattern in a function that basically takes a month and
a day and yields if the corresponding Date is a holiday.

```haskell
dateToHoliday :: MonthOfYear -> DayOfMonth -> String

> dateToHoliday January  _   = "Happy new year!"

Reviewer 2: Since you already introduced patterns before, I think we could use it here to deconstruct a `Day`:

```hs
dayToHoliday :: Day -> String
dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ January _) = ...
dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ November 1) = ...
dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ December 25) = ...
...
```

dateToHoliday November 1   = "Let's eat colada morada"
dateToHoliday December 25  = "Merry Christmas ho ho ho"
dateToHoliday _ _          = "Probably just a regular day"
```

(Now you're probably wondering what is “colada morada”? Haha no worries,
it’s an [Ecuatorian tradition][colada-morada] and we eat this meal that
is purple corn based with spices and fruits, pretty amazing to be honest.)

Back to Haskell, I think it’s pretty clear what the `dateToHoliday`
function does, the first clause matches all days of January, second
one matches the All Saints holiday, the third one matches for Christmas
and the last one it’s the fallback for all other days. I think using
the `MonthOfYears` patterns makes it a lot more readable. Having something
like:

```haskell

> dateToHoliday 12 25  = "Merry Christmas jojojo"

Reviewer 2: For showcasing the usage of a function I think is useful to use doctest syntax or something similar like a REPL output: 

```hs
> dateToHoliday 12 25
"Merry Christmas jojojo"
```

           Q2 -> periodFirstDay $ YearMonth y April
           Q3 -> periodFirstDay $ YearMonth y July
           Q4 -> periodFirstDay $ YearMonth y October
   periodLastDay (YearQuarter y q) =
       case q of
           Q1 -> periodLastDay $ YearMonth y March
           Q2 -> periodLastDay $ YearMonth y June
           Q3 -> periodLastDay $ YearMonth y September
           Q4 -> periodLastDay $ YearMonth y Dec
```

Which is defined in terms of the `periodFirstDay` and `periodLastDay` of a `Month`
and it uses (once again) a pattern named `YearMonth`.

Now let’s check the `Month` instance of `DayPeriod`:

```haskell
instance DayPeriod Month where
   periodFirstDay (YearMonth y m) = YearMonthDay y m 1
   periodLastDay (YearMonth y m) = YearMonthDay y m 31 -- clips to correct day
   dayPeriod (YearMonthDay y my _) = YearMonth y my
```

Apparently patterns are everywhere, and why not? They are pretty useful.

And last but not least, let's review the `Day` instance of `DayPeriod`:

```haskell
instance DayPeriod Day where
   periodFirstDay = id
   periodLastDay = id
   dayPeriod = id
```

As you could imagine, the first and last day of a day is the day itself.

> ### Some `time` new features examples.

Reviewer: I think this title needs to be reworded. Maybe “Examples of some new `time` features”?

So let's see what we can do with these new features introduced in the contribution.
In this section we will review some concrete code samples of how these new features
can help us in our daily software development routine. After making the proper imports
we can have something like this:

- Let's compare the first function that I presented, how to get a month's boundaries.
As we can see this function is more intuitive when comparing with the first one,
and the functions that we use now are self-decriptivec

> ```haskell

Reviewer: What happens if you indent this block so that it's part of the item? I think it should look better.

Author: It worked :)

```haskell
newtype WDay = MkWDay Day
    deriving (Eq, Show)

instance Arbitrary WDay where
    arbitrary = do
        (MkWYear y) <- arbitrary
        (MkWMonthOfYear m) <- arbitrary
        (MkWDayOfMonth d) <- arbitrary
        pure $ MkWDay $ YearMonthDay y m d
```

This first part is not related to patterns, instead we're declaring the
`Arbitray` instance of `WDay` that is a `Day` wrapper so we can generate
random days in order to make our tests and therefore our code base more robust.
When using property testing we can stop thinking of generating the data,
and we can focus on testing that our code is behaving the way it's supposed
to. We declared wrappers and their `Arbitrary` instaces for: `Day`, `DayOfMonth`,
`Month`, `MonthOfYear`, `Quarter`, `QuarterOfYear` and `Year`. Probably
a better example is the `MonthOfYear` (sounds familiar? Yes, it's the pattern
that we took as an example in the previous section) wrapper and instance, so we
all are clear of what is going on here.

```haskell
newtype WMonthOfYear = MkWMonthOfYear MonthOfYear
    deriving (Eq, Show)
instance Arbitrary WMonthOfYear where
    arbitrary = fmap MkWMonthOfYear $ choose (-5, 17)
```

> Why does it have `-5` and `17` boundaries? Well, this function should be able

Reviewer 2: @felixminom this section looks great 👍🏼

explain the `periodAllDays` tests. When you're implementing property tests is a
little harder to think of what to test, you have to search a common property
(that's why they are called property test) that let you describe the expected
behavior. So what we're checking in this test is that `all` elements (`Days`)
that the `periodAllDays` function produces, when the `DayPeriod` is a `Month`,
belong to the same year and month.

It makes sense right?. Also we can see the best of patterns in action, we're
using them to generate a random month: `MkWMonth my@(YearMonth y1 m1)`, and
we're using them to deconstruct a `Day` into `Year`, `MonthOfYear` and
`DayOfMonth`: `(YearMonthDay y2 m2 _) -> (y2, m2)`.

## Summary

It was a journey, but hopefully we got something from this tutorial. If I have to
highlight something is the following:

- When working on OSS always start by opening an issue and brainstorm your ideas with
the library's mainterners.
- Pattern synonyms is a Haskell feature that will make our code base more reable, and
as shown in this tutorial could be useful in many scenarios. The `YearMonthDay` pattern

> is probably one of the more versatil ones, so if you're working with the `time` library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is probably one of the more versatile ones, so if you're working with the `time` library
```

```haskell
type MonthOfYear = Int
```

As you can see, `MonthOfYear` is only an alias for `Int`. Now, it's possible to
define months like `Int`s, where January will correspond to 1 and so on. But
fortunately, since GHC 7.8 it's feasible to use pattern synonyms and, instead of
using raw `Int`s is possible to write this down in a pattern style and have a
more idiomatic way of defining months:

```haskell
pattern January :: MonthOfYear
pattern January = 1

pattern February :: MonthOfYear
pattern February = 2

pattern March :: MonthOfYear
pattern March = 3
.
.
.

-- | The twelve 'MonthOfYear' patterns form a @COMPLETE@ set.
pattern December :: MonthOf
pattern December = 12

{-# COMPLETE January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December #-}Year
```

If you’re curious about why the `{-# COMPLETE #-}` pragma is being
used, see the [COMPLETE pragma documentation][complete-pragma] for more
information.

Just to make sure that `November` and `11` are equivalent, let's test it
in a repl:

```bash
> November == 11
True
```

To exemplify, this pattern will be used in a function that receives a `Day` and

> yields if the corresponding aate is a holiday:

Reviewer 3: typo here: `aate` -> `date`

`DayOfMOnth`, where all three are basically `Int`s. Here is its definition:

```haskell
pattern YearMonthDay :: Year -> MonthOfYear -> DayOfMonth -> Day
pattern YearMonthDay y m d <-
   (toGregorian -> (y, m, d))
   where
       YearMonthDay y m d = fromGregorian y m d
```

Back to the `dayToHoliday` function, let's check that is working:

```haskell
> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay 2021 11 01)
"Let's eat colada morada"

> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay 2021 12 25)
"HO HO HO Merry Christmas"
```

(Now you're probably wondering what “colada morada” is? Haha no worries, it’s an
[Ecuatorian meal][colada-morada] that is purple corn based with spices and
fruits, pretty amazing to be honest.)

Back to Haskell, probably it’s pretty clear what the `dateToHoliday` function
does, the first clause matches all days of January, second one matches the All
Saints holiday, the third one matches for Christmas and the last one it’s the
fallback for all other days. Using the `MonthOfYear` and `YearMontDay` patterns
makes the code more readable. Having something like:

```haskell
dateToHoliday 12 25  = "HO HO HO Merry Christmas"
```

> is not as straightforward and readable as the function that was presented in the

Reviewer 3: Let's capitalize the first letter here

   dayPeriod = id
```

As you could imagine, the first and last day of a day is the day itself and the
period is also the same day.

### Examples of some new `time` features

So let's see what these new features that were introduced in the contribution
offers. This section will present some concrete code samples of how these new
features can help you in your daily software development routine. After making
the proper imports it's possible to have something like this.

- Let's compare the first function that was presented, how to get a month's all
days. Now in `ghci` it's possible to directly call the `periodAllDays` function
with a `Month` and that will be enough:

    ```bash
    ghci> periodAlldays (YearMonth 2021 November)
    [2021-11-01 .. 2021-11-30]
    ```

- To get starting and ending days of all quarters of a given year:

    ```haskell
    type QuarterFirstDay = Day
    type QuarterLastDay  = Day

    allQuartersBoundaries :: Year -> [(QuarterFirstDay, QuarterLastDay)]
    allQuartersBoundaries y =
       map (\q -> (periodFirstDay $ getQuarter q, periodLastDay $ getQuarter q)) [Q1 .. Q4]
       where
           getQuarter q = YearQuarter y q
    ```

> - Get quarters' lenght of a given year. Why the year is needed? Because in a

Reviewer 3: `lenght` -> `length`

refactoring, a follow up PR was opened, the purpose was to add some testing. As
it was mentioned previously the maintainer added a couple of extra functions,
these are: `dayPeriod`, `periodAllDays` and `periodLength` but they were not
tested. The tests implemented in this contribution made use of patterns synonyms
(yes, once again) and [property testing][property-testing], so in this section
this code will review . Here is the [PR][PR-2] that was proposed:

In this context, patterns were pretty useful too. A lot of value was added almost
free. Let's review a piece of code:

```haskell
newtype WDay = MkWDay Day
    deriving (Eq, Show)

instance Arbitrary WDay where
    arbitrary = do
        (MkWYear y) <- arbitrary
        (MkWMonthOfYear m) <- arbitrary
        (MkWDayOfMonth d) <- arbitrary
        pure $ MkWDay $ YearMonthDay y m d
```

This first part is not related to patterns, instead the `Arbitray` instance of
`WDay` is being declared, this instance is basically a `Day` wrapper that allows
to generate random days in order to perform property testing. When using property
testing you can stop thinking of generating the data that will feed the tests

> manually,and you can focus on testing that the code is behaving the way it's

Reviewer 3: Let's add a space after the comma (,)

(`periodFirstDay`), then it creates a `MkWMonth` that is the arbitrary version
of `Month` and is the one that will generate the randomness for property testing
and finally it compares that the first day of a month is the same when the
`periodFirstDay` function is used than when using the `YearMonthDay` pattern.

The `periodLastDay` tests are a little peculiar, property testing was not used
in this case since it was needed to test some particular cases. Here the tests
are checking that February's last day is calculated properly for both leap and
regular years. As you can see in some cases unit tests can be useful too, so
don't stick too much to property testing.

Well, probably the two previous examples are very straightforward, but let's see
what the `periodAllDays` tests are doing. When implementing property tests is a
little harder to think of what to test, you have to search a common property
(that's why they are called property test) that let you describe the expected
behavior. So what it's being checked in this test is that `all` elements (`Days`)
that the `periodAllDays` function produces, when the `DayPeriod` is a `Month`,
belong to the same year and month.

> Finally the `periodLength` was tested and in in this case the test suite is a

Reviewer 3: duplicated word `in`

---

As Stack Builders one of the core values of our company is contributing to open
source (OSS). We believe that we have the power to change people’s lives (or at
least make it easier) by pushing the boundaries of the software industry and
we’re happy to announce that we were able to contribute to one of Haskell's core
libraries, [time][time-hackage].

All started with the idea: “What if we bring some utilities that Ruby on Rails
(RoR) has to Haskell?”. For instance, “How can one get the range of days that a
month has?” or “How can one get a quarter’s boundaries?” were some of the
questions that came to our mind. In the following example the RoR code needed to
get all days in a month will be shown and then Haskell version to do so:

```ruby
today = Date.today
today.next_month.all_month
=> Wed, 01 Nov 2021..Fri, 30 Nov 2021
```

```haskell
allMonth :: Day -> [Day]
allMonth day =
    let (y, m , _) = toGregorian day
    in [fromGregorian y m 1 .. fromGregorian y m 31]
```

and then in `ghci` this function can be invoked:

```bash
> today <- utctDay <$> getCurrentTime
> allMonth today
[2021-11-01 .. 2021-11-30]
```

> As you can see, the Haskell code has to be implemented to latter be called. Why

Reviewer: s/latter/then (but perhaps rephrasing should be better, just something other than _latter_, which is a typo)

the last day of the month is always set to be 31st, if some months have less than
31 days? Could be crossing your mind right now. That’s because `fromGregorian`
clips the values to be correct for each month, but now, what is `fromGregorian`?

> Well that’s exactly what this contribution wante to avoid when using the `time`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well that’s exactly what this contribution wanted to avoid when using the `time`
```

Or _wants_, I don't know which one you meant.

> library, stop using some functions that really don't know what their purpose

Reviewer: > that really don't know

Something's missing here (_that don't have a clear purpose_?).

Also, why doesn't `fromGregorian` have a clear purpose? If it doesn't, is the contribution or the `YearMonthDay` the one adding something clearer (I'm only asking about `fromGregorian`)?

Author: There are two functions and a pattern to build a Day in the library. Those are `fromGregorian`, `fromJulian` and the `YearMonthDay` pattern. When we started working on this we were using the `fromJulian` function that has some really weird behavior, specially when the Date needs to be clipped. So I wanted to somehow highlight that using this function is not as straightforward as the way it is right now.

dayToHoliday _                            = "Probably just a regular day"
```

Another pattern synonym is introduced here. The `YearMonthDay` pattern builds
a `Day` in terms of the `Year`, `MonthOfYear` (do you remember this one?) and
`DayOfMOnth`, where all three are basically `Int`s. Here is its definition:

```haskell
pattern YearMonthDay :: Year -> MonthOfYear -> DayOfMonth -> Day
pattern YearMonthDay y m d <-
   (toGregorian -> (y, m, d))
   where
       YearMonthDay y m d = fromGregorian y m d
```

Back to the `dayToHoliday` function, let's check that is working:

```haskell
> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay 2021 11 01)
"Let's eat colada morada"

> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay 2021 12 25)
"HO HO HO Merry Christmas"
```

(Now you're probably wondering what “colada morada” is? Haha no worries, it’s an
[Ecuatorian meal][colada-morada] that is purple corn based with spices and
fruits, pretty amazing to be honest.)

Back to Haskell, probably it’s pretty clear what the `dateToHoliday` function
does, the first clause matches all days of January, second one matches the All
Saints holiday, the third one matches for Christmas and the last one it’s the

> fallback for all other days. By using the `MonthOfYears` pattern, it makes it a

Reviewer: Is it `YearMonthDay` instead of `MonthOfYears` here?

Author: Actually are both, I will rephrase this.

---

As Stack Builders one of the core values of our company is contributing
to open source (OSS). We believe that we have the power to change
people’s lives (or at least make it easier) by pushing the boundaries
of the software industry and we’re happy to announce that the past month
we were able to contribute to one of Haskell's core libraries,
[time][time-hackage].

We started with the idea: “What if we bring some utilities that Ruby on
Rails (RoR) has to Haskell?”. For instance, “How can I get the range of
days that a month has?” or “How can I get a quarter’s boundaries?” were
some of the questions that came to our mind. In the following example
I will show the RoR code needed to get all days in a month and then Haskell
version to do so:

```ruby
today = Date.today
today.next_month.all_month
=> Wed, 01 Nov 2021..Fri, 30 Nov 2021
```

```haskell
allMonth :: Day -> [Day]
allMonth day =
    let (y, m , _) = toGregorian day
    in [fromGregorian y m 1 .. fromGregorian y m 31]
```

and then in `ghci` we can call our function:

```bash
> today <- utctDay <$> getCurrentTime

> > monthBoundaries today

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> allMonth today
```

fortunately, since GHC 7.8 we are able to use pattern synonyms and we
could, instead of using raw `Int`s, write this down in a pattern style
and have a more idiomatic way of defining months:

```haskell
pattern January :: MonthOfYear
pattern January = 1

pattern February :: MonthOfYear
pattern February = 2

pattern March :: MonthOfYear
pattern March = 3
.
.
.

-- | The twelve 'MonthOfYear' patterns form a @COMPLETE@ set.
pattern December :: MonthOf
pattern December = 12

{-# COMPLETE January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December #-}Year
```

If you’re curious about why the `{-# COMPLETE #-}` pragma is being
used, see the [COMPLETE pragma documentation][complete-pragma] for more
information.

Just to make sure that `November` and `11` are equivalent, let's test it
in a stack repl:

```bash
> November == 11
True
```

We’ll use this pattern in a function that receives a `Day` and yields if the
corresponding Date is a holiday:

```haskell
dayToHoliday :: Day -> String
dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ January  _)  = "Happy new year!"
dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ November 1)  = "Let's eat colada morada"

> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ December 25) = "Merry Christmas jojojo"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ December 25) = "HO HO HO Merry Christmas"
```

> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay _ _ _)         = "Probably just a regular day"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dayToHoliday _ = "Probably just a regular day"
```

build a `Day` in terms of the `Year`, `MonthOfYear` (do you remember this one?)
and `DayOfMOnth`, where all three are basically `Int`s. Here is its definition:

```haskell
pattern YearMonthDay :: Year -> MonthOfYear -> DayOfMonth -> Day
pattern YearMonthDay y m d <-
   (toGregorian -> (y, m, d))
   where
       YearMonthDay y m d = fromGregorian y m d
```

Back to our function, let's check that is working:

```haskell
> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay 2021 11 01)
"Let's eat colada morada"

> dayToHoliday (YearMonthDay 2021 November 01)
"Let's eat colada morada"
```

(Now you're probably wondering what is “colada morada”? Haha no worries,
it’s an [Ecuatorian tradition][colada-morada] and we eat this meal that
is purple corn based with spices and fruits, pretty amazing to be honest.)

Back to Haskell, I think it’s pretty clear what the `dateToHoliday`
function does, the first clause matches all days of January, second
one matches the All Saints holiday, the third one matches for Christmas
and the last one it’s the fallback for all other days. I think using
the `MonthOfYears` patterns makes it a lot more readable. Having something
like:

```haskell

> dateToHoliday 12 25  = "Merry Christmas jojojo"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dateToHoliday 12 25 = "HO HO HO Merry Christmas"
```

```

Will not be as straightforward as the function that we have right now.

> I haven’t mentioned it yet, but the patterns that we built previously

Reviewer 2: Let's try to write all the sentences in the third-person point of view.

Reviewer: @sestrella Can you elaborate on this comment? I'm not sure if you mean something about the “I” or the “we” here. Just making sure this is clear.

---
title: Time, patterns and a little more
published: 2021-11-25
tags: haskell, pattern-synonyms, property-testing
libraries: time
language: haskell
author: Felix Miño
author-name: Felix Miño
github-profile: felixminom
description: In this tutorial we’re going to explore the use of pattern synonyms in Haskell, later we’ll give a brief overview to the Stack Builders’ contribution to the `time` Haskell library and finally we’ll review how to use the utilities that were introduced in the contribution.
---

As Stack Builders one of the core values of our company is contributing
to open source (OSS). We believe that we have the power to change
people’s lives (or at least make it easier) by pushing the boundaries
of the software industry and we’re happy to announce that the past month
we were able to contribute to one of Haskell's core libraries,
[time][time-hackage].

We started with the idea: “What if we bring some utilities that Ruby on
Rails (RoR) has to Haskell?”. For instance, “How can I get the range of
days that a month has?” or “How can I get a quarter’s boundaries?” were
some of the questions that came to our mind. In the following example

> I will show the Haskell code needed to get all days in a month and its
> version in RoR.

Reviewer: Since the order changed (from Haskell then Ruby on Rails to Ruby on Rails then Haskell), can you make it clearer that the first one is Ruby on Rails? Here's a possible way to make that clearer:

```suggestion
I will show the RoR code to get all days in a month and then a Haskell
version to do so
```

```ruby
today = Date.today
today.next_month.all_month
=> Wed, 01 Nov 2021..Fri, 30 Nov 2021
```

```haskell
allMonth :: Day -> [Day]
allMonth day =
    let (y, m , _) = toGregorian day

>     in [fromGregorian y m 1 .. fromGregorian y m 31]

Reviewer: Would using `YearMonthDay` work here? I don't have the appropriate version of `time` to test this:

```haskell
allMonth (YearMonthDay y m _) = [YearMonthDay y m 1 .. YearMonthDay y m 31]
```

If it works, I don't think it should be added here. Instead, it could be shown after talking about patterns and `YearMonthDay` (it might be even better than the one with the new type class).

Author: Didn't get this one, should I change it or not ? It will work with `YearMonthDay` btw.

Reviewer: I think it shouldn't be changed here because `YearMonthDay` hasn't been introduced yet, but it might be good to add after patterns and `YearMonthDay` are discussed if you want (ignoring the 31, it looks like a good alternative implementation to me).

Author: Yes I'm using this pattern in some places after it's introduced. I think the intention of this snippet is also to highlight that previous to our contribution the code needed was not pretty clear and not very readable, so I think in this case the 31 plays as a good example.

```

> and then in a `stack repl` we can invoque our function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then in a `stack repl` we can call our function:
```

Or _invoke_.

Also, can you either mention both `ghci` and `stack repl` or just say `ghci`? I guess Stack is not required for this.

```bash
> today <- utctDay <$> getCurrentTime
> monthBoundaries today
[2021-11-01 .. 2021-11-30]
```

> As you can see, we had to implement the Haskell code by ourselfs. Why are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, we had to implement the Haskell code by ourselves. Why are
```

we setting the last day to always be 31st if some months have less than 31
days? Could be crossing your mind right now. That’s because `fromGregorian`

> clips the values to be correct for each month, but not, what is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clips the values to be correct for each month, but now, what is
```

I'm guessing you meant _now_ here.

pattern allows us to define months of the year not by a number but by its name.

The `MonthOfYear` data type is defined like this:

```haskell
type MonthOfYear = Int
```

As you can see, it is only an alias for `Int`. We now are able to define
months like `Int`s where January will correspond to 1 and so on. But
fortunately, since GHC 7.8 we are able to use pattern synonyms and we
could, instead of using raw `Int`s, write this down in a pattern style
and have a more idiomatic way of defining months.

```haskell
pattern January :: MonthOfYear
pattern January = 1

pattern February :: MonthOfYear
pattern February = 2

pattern March :: MonthOfYear
pattern March = 3
.
.
.

-- | The twelve 'MonthOfYear' patterns form a @COMPLETE@ set.
pattern December :: MonthOf
pattern December = 12

{-# COMPLETE January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December #-}Year
```

If you’re curious about why the `{-# COMPLETE #-}` pragma is being
used, see the [COMPLETE pragma documentation][complete-pragma] for more
information.

Just to make sure that `November` and `11` are equivalent, let's test it

> in a stack repl.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a stack repl:
```

I don't think this is being used for other examples, but I think switching to colon before code snippets should be better.

Author: @jpvillaisaza answering since it does not let me to do it directly in your comment. Regarding the laws all the ones you mentioned are required, the ones I added are more like properties that some instances should satisfy. Not really sure how to proceed with this one.

Reviewer: Okay, that sounds good.
